# Translating Sonic Pi

[![Weblate](https://hosted.weblate.org/widgets/sonic-pi/-/svg-badge.svg)](https://hosted.weblate.org/engage/sonic-pi/)

(This document is meant for translators who want to help bring Sonic Pi 
to their language. If you're contributing code to Sonic Pi and want to 
make sure that your feature is translatable and the translation always 
up-to-date, please read the primer to the [Translation 
Workflow](TRANSLATION-WORKFLOW.md) for coders.)

Sonic Pi is designed to be used by school kids as early as primary 
school. We want to make sure that it's usable outside the 
English-speaking world and if you want to help kids in your country to 
be able to play with it, please consider translating Sonic Pi to your 
language.

A number of awesome contributors have already translated much of Sonic 
Pi to their language. We always appreciate help by those willing to 
proofread, spellcheck or update the existing translations. 

Thanks to everybody involved!

As Sonic Pi development moves fast, there are always updates to the 
screen messages and the tutorial. To help translators keep track of 
these changes, _we are currently moving to 
*[Weblate](https://hosted.weblate.org/engage/sonic-pi/)*_, an 
open-source web-based translation editor.

The nice thing about Weblate is that from now on, you don't need to be 
a developer to help translate Sonic Pi (and you don't need to know 
anything about github or the other tools we use during development).

## What you can translate

The Sonic Pi Qt GUI is the application you use on your desktop screen.
It contains few screen strings and translating it is fairly easy.

The tutorial is a fairly long document. Translating it takes 
significantly longer, but it's very rewarding as it is the best way to 
introduce new users to Sonic Pi.

It is planned to make the language reference translatable in the 
future, too.

## How to fix or contribute a translation

So if you want to...

- proofread an existing translation
- correct a mistake in a translation
- translate Sonic Pi to a whole new language

...all you need to do is visit [Sonic Pi on 
Weblate](https://hosted.weblate.org/engage/sonic-pi/), sign up and 
follow the instructions there.

_Please note_ that we are still in the process of moving to Weblate. 
You can already translate the Qt GUI there, but the tutorial will 
follow soon.

Weblate gives you a number of helpful tools, e.g. it spots common 
mistakes, you can keep a glossary of recurring terms and be notified 
when a new string needs to be translated.

By the way, if you spot a spelling mistake in the English texts, please 
[file an issue](https://github.com/samaaron/sonic-pi/issues) or correct 
it with a pull request here on github, as you cannot change those via 
Weblate.
